
1. Brief Tour of E-Cell4 Simulations
====================================

First of all, you have to load the E-Cell4 library:

.. code:: ipython2

    %matplotlib inline
    from ecell4 import *

1.1. Quick Demo
---------------

There are three fundamental components consisting of E-Cell System
version 4, which are ``Model``, ``World``, and ``Simulator``. These
components describe concepts in simulation.

-  ``Model`` describes a problem to simulate as its name suggests.
-  ``World`` describes a state, e.g. an initial state and a state at a
   time-point.
-  ``Simulator`` describes a solver.

``Model`` is independent from solvers. Every solver can share a single
``Model`` instance. Each alogrithm has a corresponding pair of ``World``
and ``Simulator`` (these pairs are capsulized into ``Factory`` class).
``World`` is not necessarily needed to be bound to ``Model`` and
``Simulator``, but ``Simulator`` needs both ``Model`` and ``World``.

Before running a simulation, you have to make a ``Model``. E-Cell4
supports multiple ways to buld a ``Model`` (See `2. How to Build a
Model <2.%20How%20to%20Build%20a%20Model.ipynb>`__). Here, we explain
the simplest way using the ``with`` statement with ``reaction_rules``:

.. code:: ipython2

    with reaction_rules():
        A + B > C | 0.01  # equivalent to create_binding_reaction_rule
        C > A + B | 0.3   # equivalent to create_unbinding_reaction_rule
    
    m1 = get_model()
    print(m1)


.. parsed-literal::

    <ecell4.core.NetworkModel object at 0x7fbbb2232af0>


Please remember to write parentheses ``()`` after ``reaction_rules``.
Here, a ``Model`` with two ``ReactionRule``\ s named ``m1`` was built.
Lines in the ``with`` block describe ``ReactionRule``\ s, a binding and
unbinding reaction respectively. A kinetic rate for the mass action
reaction is defined after a separator ``|``, i.e. ``0.01`` or ``0.3``.
In the form of ordinary differential equations, this model can be
described as:

.. math:: [\mathrm{A}]'=[\mathrm{B}]'=-[\mathrm{C}]=-0.01[\mathrm{A}][\mathrm{B}]+0.3[\mathrm{C}]

For more compact description, ``A + B == C | (0.01, 0.3)`` is also
acceptable.

E-Cell4 has a simple interface to run simulations with the given model,
``run_simulation``. This enables for you to run simulations without
instanciate ``World`` and ``Simulator`` by yourself. To solve this
model, you have to give a volume, an initial value for each ``Species``
and duration of time:

.. code:: ipython2

    run_simulation(10.0, model=m1, y0={'A': 60, 'B': 60}, volume=1.0)



.. image:: tutorial1_files/tutorial1_6_0.png


To switch simulation algorithm, you only need to give the type of solver
(``ode`` is used as a default) as follows:

.. code:: ipython2

    run_simulation(10.0, model=m1, y0={'A': 60, 'B': 60}, solver='gillespie')



.. image:: tutorial1_files/tutorial1_8_0.png


1.2. Spatial Simulation and Visualization
-----------------------------------------

E-Cell4 now supports multiple spatial algorithms, ``egfrd``,
``spatiocyte`` and ``meso``. In addition to the model used in
non-spatial solvers (``ode`` and ``gillespie``), these spatial solvers
need extra information about each ``Species``, i.e. a diffusion
coefficient and radius.

The ``with`` statement with ``species_attributes`` is available to
describe these properties:

.. code:: ipython2

    with species_attributes():
        A | B | C | {'radius': '0.005', 'D': '1'}  # 'D' is for the diffusion coefficient
    
    with reaction_rules():
        A + B == C | (0.01, 0.3)
    
    m2 = get_model()

Even though the properties indicate a floating number, each attribute
must be given as a string.

Now you can run a spatial simulation in the same way as above (``egfrd``
would need long time to simulate):

.. code:: ipython2

    run_simulation(10.0, model=m2, y0={'A': 60, 'B': 60}, solver='meso')



.. image:: tutorial1_files/tutorial1_12_0.png


Structure (e.g. membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus) is only supported by
``spatiocyte`` and ``meso`` now. For the simulation, ``location`` that
each species belongs to must be specified in its attribute first.

.. code:: ipython2

    with species_attributes():
        A | {'D': '1', 'location': 'S'}  # 'S' is a name of the structure
    
    m3 = get_model()  # with no reactions

E-Cell4 supports primitive shapes as a structure like ``Sphere``:

.. code:: ipython2

    sphere = Sphere(Real3(0.5, 0.5, 0.5), 0.48)  # a center position and radius

E-Cell4 provides various kinds of ``Observer``\ s, which log the state
during a simulation. Two observers are declared to log positions of
molecules. ``FixedIntervalTrajectoryObserver`` logs a trajectory of a
molecule, and ``FixedIntervalHDF5Observer`` saves ``World`` to a HDF5
file at the given interval:

.. code:: ipython2

    obs1 = FixedIntervalTrajectoryObserver(1e-3)
    obs2 = FixedIntervalHDF5Observer(0.1, 'test%02d.h5')

Then, ``run_simulation`` accepts structures and observers as arguments
``structure`` and ``observers`` respectively (see also
``help(run_simulation)``):

.. code:: ipython2

    run_simulation(1.0, model=m3, y0={'A': 60}, structures={'S': sphere},
                   solver='spatiocyte', observers=(obs1, obs2), return_type=None)

E-Cell4 also provides visualizations including an interactive
visualization on Jupyter Notebook like ``viz.plot_world``.
``viz.plot_world`` plots positions of molecules in 3D. In addition, by
using ``load_world``, you can easily restore the state of ``World`` from
a HDF5 file:

.. code:: ipython2

    # viz.plot_world(load_world('test00.h5'), species_list=['A'])
    viz.plot_world(load_world('test00.h5'), species_list=['A'], interactive=False)



.. image:: tutorial1_files/tutorial1_22_0.png


Also for ``FixedIntervalTrajectoryObserver``, ``viz.plot_trajectory``
plots trajectories in the interactive way:

.. code:: ipython2

    # viz.plot_trajectory(obs1)
    viz.plot_trajectory(obs1, interactive=False)



.. image:: tutorial1_files/tutorial1_24_0.png


For more details, see `5. How to Log and Visualize
Simulations <5.%20How%20to%20Log%20and%20Visualize%20Simulations.ipynb>`__.
